# Cognitive Information Processing
`Information processing is the change (processing) of information in any manner detectable by an observer`. **Within the field of cognitive psychology,
information processing is an approach to the goal of understanding human thinking**. It began in the 1940s and 1950s. Educators are very
interested in the study of how humans learn. This is because how one learns, acquires new information, and retains previous information guides
selection of long-term learning objectives and methods of effective instruction.

To this end, cognition as a psychological area of study goes far beyond simply the taking in and retrieving information. It is a broad field
dedicated to the study of the mind holistically. `Neisser (1967)`, one of the most influential researchers in cognition, defined it as **the study
of how people `encode`, `structure`, `store`, `retrieve`, use or otherwise learn knowledge**.

Cognitive psychologists hypothesise an intervening variable or set of variables between environment and behaviour which contrasts it
with behavioural theories.

## Principles of the Information Processing
Even though there are widely varying views within cognitive psychology, there is general agreement among most cognitive psychologists on
some basic principles of the information processing system (Huitt, 2000).

>  The first is the assumption of a limited capacity of the mental system. This means that the amount of information that can be processed
> by the system is constrained in some very important ways. Bottlenecks, or restrictions in the flow and processing of information, occur
> at very specific points `(e.g., Broadbent, 1975; Case, 1978)`.

> A second principle is that **a control mechanism is required to oversee the encoding, transformation, processing, storage, retrieval
> and utilisation of information** `(e.g., Atkinson & Shiffrin, 1971)`. That is, not all of the processing capacity of the system is available
> an executive function that oversees this process will use up some of this capability. **When one is learning a new task or is confronted with
> a new environment, the executive function requires more processing power than when one is doing a routine task or is in a familiar environment**.

> A third principle is that **there is a two-way flow of information as we try to make sense of the world around us**. We constantly use information
> that we gather through the senses `(often referred to as bottom-up processing)` and information we have stored in memory `(often called top-down
> processing)` in a dynamic process as we construct meaning about our environment and our relations to it. This is somewhat analogous to the
> difference between inductive reasoning `(going from specific instances to a general conclusion)` and deductive reasoning `(going from a general
> principle to specific examples.)` A similar distinction can be made between using information we derive from the senses and that generated by
> our imaginations.

> A fourth principle generally accepted by cognitive psychologists is that the **human organism has been genetically prepared to process and
> organise information in specific ways.** For example, a human infant is more likely to look at a human face than any other stimulus.
> Other research has discovered additional biological predispositions to process information. For example, language development is similar
> in all human infants regardless of language spoken by adults or the area in which they live `(e.g., rural versus urban, Asia versus Europe.)`
> All human infants with normal hearing babble and coo, generate first words, begin the use of telegraphic speech `(example, ball gone)`, and
> overgeneralise `(e.g., using “goed to the store” when they learn the verbs)` at approximately the same ages(Discussed in detail in Block 3).

